


 
BOOK INTRODUCTION: Modesty: The Fence Of The Soul And The Compass Of 
Understanding 
In the name of God the most Merciful, the most Compassionate
Praise be to Allah who made morals a fence for his religion, and prayers and peace be upon those 
who were sent to complete their honors, and on all his family and companions. 
After:
The Holy Qur'an is the constitution of the Ummah and its integrated way of life; it was not revealed to 
be just a book to be read, but to be a "creation" to be lived, as the Mother of the Believers Aisha (may 
Allah be pleased with her) described our Prophet Muhammad (peace and blessings of Allaah be upon 
him) when she said: " His character was the Qur'an." The moral order is not just a part of Islam, but 
its essence and spirit in all its aspects.
Within this integrated system of morality, a great creation emerges, which is in fact the key to all 
good, and a barrier to all evil:  the creation of modesty. This creation, which was singled out for 
mention and praise in the Qur'an and Sunnah, and immortalized the Qur'an mentioning a woman 
who wore his robes, so she was a sign in dignity and literature, and the Prophet (peace and blessings 
of Allaah be upon him) praised him until he made it "a division of faith" and "the creation of Islam".
But in our time, when intellectual and cultural waves have collided, we are facing a central issue, a 
great creation that is about to fade from the souls of many . It is the creation of "modesty", that 
division of faith that brings nothing but good, that fence which only beautifies that which it is a part 
of.
 We have come to see with our own eyes how its absence or weakness has led to a lot of corruption in 
our societies, which calls for a serious pause to search for causes and roots.In which there are many 
indications of the weakness of this creation, and the transgressions hurt hearing and sight, and we 
have seen what hurts the heart and causes regret in the soul, returning to this pure source has 
become an urgent necessity, and an urgent need. By the power of modesty, it is close to the good, 
and its distance from it is close to the opposite.
The reason for this erosion in the wall of modesty was only  to put the Sharia away from the reality of 
life, and to move away from the right way of God, and the blind imitation of other nations, until the 
saying of the truthful and trustworthy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allaah be upon him) about 
following the Sunnahs before us almost applied to us in the footsteps of the shell with the shell.
This is where the journey of this book begins. But it will not be just a traditional review of texts, but a 
practical application of a new methodology of understanding, aimed at diving into the depths of the 
"Quranic Arabic tongue" to discover its treasures from within. This methodology, which we detailed in 
our book "The Jurisprudence of the Qur'anic Tongue: A New Approach to Understanding the Text 
and the Manuscript", is based on the belief that the Qur'an is an integrated structure that interprets 
itself, and that the rules of its understanding are derived from its own linguistic and cognitive 
structure. It is a call to revive "authentic contemplation" that transcends blind imitation and is subject 
to the authority of the text and its inner logic.
This new jurisprudence is based on methodological foundations, the most important of which are: 
understanding the intrinsic connotations of "letter names", and considering the "mathani" – literal 
pairs – as the pivotal structural system that reveals the "kinetic meaning" of words and negates 
synonymy. By applying these tools, we hope to provide a deeper and more authentic understanding 
of modesty creation, revealing its inner and tight logic, linking it to the laws of the universe and life, 
and highlighting its renewed miracle.

It is an attempt to move from treating the word "modesty" and its derivatives as static symbols, to 
sensing them as living beings carrying the secrets of the Creator and creation. We will dive into the 
definition of modesty linguistically and idiomatically, and read the verses that explicitly and implicitly 
mentioned it, and reflect on the modesty of God, which befits His majesty, and the modesty of His 
honorable prophets, and stop at the unique Qur'anic models that embodied it.
More importantly, this book will seek to present a new vision, which presents "modesty" not only 
as a moral end, but as a prerequisite and an indispensable cognitive tool for understanding the 
Book of God. We will reveal how this heartfelt creation is the compass that guides the process of 
contemplation, and how it is the antidote that heals superficial understanding, and it is the key that 
opens the doors of wisdom in God's words, all through the lens of this method, which we hope will 
be the gateway to new contemplation and renewed understanding.
 
Nasser Ibn Dawood is an Islamic engineer and researcher
16 May 2025
 
INDEX 
Book Introduction: Modesty: The Fence of the Soul and the Compass of Understanding	2
Index	4
Introduction to the jurisprudence of the Qur'anic tongue: a new methodology for understanding the 
text	5
Chapter One: Deciphering: The Radical Dimensions of Modesty	7
Chapter One: In the Hospitality of the Root -YY-	7
Chapter Two: Modesty in Dictionaries and Heritage - Comparison and Integration	9
Chapter Two: Manifestations of Modesty in the Qur'anic Scene	12
Al-Fasal al-'Awwal: Al-Hayya al-Ilahi - (Wa'l-'a'l-'a'a'l-'a'a'i'l-ya'a'l-ta'a'i'i'min al-huqa'i)"	12
Chapter Two: Prophetic Modesty - Perfection in Creation	14
Chapter Three: Modesty in Women - The Title of Chastity and Beauty	16
Chapter Four: The Modesty of Joseph - The Power of Chastity and the Beauty of Pardon	18
Chapter Five: The Modesty of Mary - Peace be Upon Her - The Manifestation of the Immaculate 
Instinct	19
Chapter Three: From Ethics to Knowledge: Modesty is a Condition for Understanding	21
Chapter One: The Traditional Platform - Understanding the Parable in the Context of the Greatness 
of Creation	21
Chapter Two: New Horizons - Interpretive Readings of the Proverb	24
Chapter Three: Integrated Theory - Modesty as an Antidote to the "Mosquito Condition"	26
Chapter Three : The Compass of Modesty - How is creation the key to contemplation?	27
Chapter Four: Modesty and Civilizational Impact: From the Individual to Society	28
Chapter One: The Individual between the Compass of Modesty and the Prison of Shyness	28
Chapter Two: Modesty in Building Society - The Nation's Bulwark in the Face of Its Enemies	30
Chapter Three: Scourges and Limits of Modesty - Between Impotence and Rudeness	32
Chapter Four: The Challenges of Modesty in the Digital Age - An Ethical Compass for a Changing 
World	34
Book Conclusion: Towards a "Hayy" Generation	35
Sources and references	39


 
INTRODUCTION TO THE JURISPRUDENCE OF THE QUR'ANIC TONGUE: A NEW 
METHODOLOGY FOR UNDERSTANDING THE TEXT
Introduction: The Need for Renewed Understanding
The Holy Qur'an, the eternal word of God, is a unique linguistic and cognitive system, revealed in a 
clear Arabic tongue not only to be a book of guidance, but to be of a tight internal structure that 
reflects the laws of the universe and the realities of existence. Despite the great efforts made by the 
nation's scholars to understand it, some of these efforts have sometimes obscured part of its original 
structural depth, or dealt with it with rules that may not be fully consistent with the specificity of its 
unique tongue. In our increasingly challenging age, there is an urgent need for a real return to the 
Qur'an, to discover its treasures from within and to activate its role as an authentic source of 
knowledge.
From this standpoint, the "Jurisprudence of the Arabic Qur'anic Tongue" comes as a call to establish a 
new and renewed methodology of understanding, which does not criticize heritage as much as it 
seeks to dive into the depths of the Qur'anic text to discover its internal system and its own rules.
 
The basic principles of the Qur'anic jurisprudence curriculum
This jurisprudence is based on the belief that the Qur'an is an integrated structure capable of 
interpreting itself by itself, and that the rules of its understanding are derived from its linguistic and 
cognitive structure itself. It aims to reveal its inner hermetic logic and link it to the laws of the 
universe and life, and to highlight its renewed miracles. Among its most important pillars:
•	Unity of text and self-clarification: the belief that the Holy Qur'an is an integrated structure 
that interprets each other.
•	Intentional principle: Recognizing that the Qur'anic structure has a tight and intentional 
internal system.
•	Deducing rules from within: The rules of understanding are derived from the linguistic and 
cognitive structure of the Qur'an itself, and not from external rules that may fall on it.
•	Distinguishing between tongues: Recognizing the specificity of the "Quranic Arabic tongue" 
and distinguishing it from the circulating "Arabic tongue".
•	Methodological controls: Adherence to strict controls derived from the Qur'an itself, such as 
the context in its multiple dimensions, the overall system, the rejection of contradiction, and 
the use of Qur'anic manuscripts as evidence.
 
Keys to deep structure: Mathani "linguistic pairs", kinetic meaning, and sliced letters
To achieve deep understanding, the curriculum offers a set of analytical tools and keys derived from 
the structure of the text.
1. Mathani "literal pairs": the hidden system of the word
Unlike traditional linguistics, which considers the triple root to be the basic unit, Qur'anic philology 
reveals a deeper and more authentic system, the "mathani" or "literal pairs" system.
•	Definition: Mathani are literal pairs (e.g., q/l, h/m, r/r) that form the basic nucleus of 
Qur'anic words. Each pair carries a relatively fixed original connotation that is deduced 
through the comprehensive extrapolation of its occurrence in different words throughout 
the Qur'an.
•	Importance: These bladders are the essential structural units on which the construction of 
words is based, and they are the key to understanding the original meaning of words and 
revealing the exact relationships between them, which negates the possibility of complete 
synonymy.
•	Quranic origin: This approach holds that these literal pairs are what the verse of Surat Al-
Hajar may refer to: "We have brought you seven of the Mathani and the Great Qur'an", 
where "seven of the Mathani" represent the basic origins or types of craft pairs on which the 
Qur'an is built.
2. The mechanism of deconstruction and derivation of "kinetic meaning"
To reach deep connotation, the curriculum proposes a mechanism for deconstructing words into their 
constituent bladders as a tool for reflection.
•	Deconstruction: The triple root "H1 H2 H3" is broken down into two complementary pairs, 
H1 H2 and H2 H3. The word 
"Creation", for example, is seen as the product of the interaction of the Muthanna "khl" (which may 
refer to the preparation) with the Muthanna "l" (which may refer to the manifestation and 
encounter).
•	Kinetic meaning: is the goal of the analysis process. It is not the static dictionary meaning, 
but it is 
The original dynamic connotation that links the word to the reality of the name, its movement, 
influence and function in the order of the universe. This meaning is derived from the analysis of the 
structure and meaning of the word, and it reduces the need to speak metaphorically and reveals the 
miraculous ability of the Qur'anic tongue to express the dynamic realities of existence.
3. Cut letters: fence architectural keys
The curriculum presents a new vision of the cut letters (pain, r, ham) as not mysterious symbols, but 
structural keys.
•	Function: Each syllable letter is a symbol that refers to a specific set of "mathani" that 
dominates the surah, is remarkably repeated in its keywords, and defines its "architecture" 
and main themes.
•	Evidence: The  association of certain groups of letters with specific groups of surahs, and the 
similarity of these surahs in their axes, indicates that this distribution is not random but 
subject to an intentional system. The cut letters, then, serve as a title or key that directs the 
contemplative to the basic structure of the surah.
 
Curriculum Application: From Single Word to Integrated Text
This methodology is not limited to the triple roots, but extends to include longer words and names 
that are thought to be foreign, confirming that the Qur'an absorbed them within its structural system. 
This is done through a two-step analytical mechanism:
1.	Find the composition first: the  probability that the word is a compound of two or more 
identifiable units is studied. Example: Name 
"Abraham" can be decomposed into a compound of "Ibra" (meaning repudiation) + "Him" (meaning 
heman and meditation). And like her 
"Hell" that can be decomposed into "jh" (hand or stiffness) + "sleep" (the constant increase and 
spread of torment).
2.	Second, if the structure is not clear, or to increase depth, the word is deconstructed into its 
overlapping literal pairs, revealing deeper semantic harmonies.
 
Conclusion: Towards Authentic Reflection
The approach of the "Qur'anic jurisprudence" is essentially a call to revive "authentic contemplation" 
that transcends tradition and is subject to the authority of the text and its internal logic. It is an 
attempt to provide practical keys and tools that move us from dealing with letters and words as static 
symbols to sensing them as living beings carrying the secrets of the Creator and creation within an 
integrated linguistic and cognitive system. It is hoped that this work will be the key to a renewed 
understanding, which contributes to building a better future for the implementation of the eternal 
message of the Qur'an in our lives.
[P. 29] [P. 29] 

CHAPTER ONE: DECIPHERING: THE RADICAL DIMENSIONS OF MODESTY
-Introduction to the door-  
Before we delve into the manifestations of moral and cognitive modesty, it is necessary to take a 
foundational pause in which we dive into the first nucleus from which this concept was formed. The 
words in the "Qur'anic Arabic tongue" are not just static phonetic templates, but living beings, 
carrying in their genetic structure - their root - a secret that reveals their kinetic meaning and function 
in the overall system of the Qur'an. This chapter is an archaeological and linguistic journey, in which 
we dig the layers of meaning to reach the "radical meaning" of the word "modesty" and its 
derivatives, and reveal how Understanding this root is the first key to understanding everything that 
comes next.

CHAPTER ONE: IN THE HOSPITALITY OF THE ROOT -YY-
1. Modesty is a language: between life and rudeness
When we go back to the mother dictionaries to question the word "modesty", we find ourselves 
confronted with a surprisingly central connotation. Imam Ibn Faris summarizes it in "Language 
Standards" when he states that the root  of "YYY" is due to two origins: "One is other than death, 
and the other is timidity, which is against insolence."
This identification is not merely a lexical definition, but a declaration of the basic premise on which 
this entire book is based: modesty, in its deepest essence, stems from life. It is not an accidental 
quality, but a direct manifestation of a spirit that comes to life and consciously interacts with its 
surroundings. The first asset—life—is the source, and the second, timidity, is the downstream.
To enrich this meaning, Imam Ibn al-Qayyim al-Jawziyya makes a wonderful rhetorical gesture linking 
the life of the soul and the life of the earth: "Modesty is from life, and modesty is for rain, but it is 
limited... Al-Ghaith is called alive as a palace, because it contains the life of the earth, plants and 
animals." Just as "alive" rain is the secret of the life of the dead earth, purifying it and growing in it 
seeds and beauty, so "modesty" is the soul that cleanses it from the impurity of imperfections, and 
grows in it the tree of virtues and noble morals. Modesty for the soul is like rain for the earth, both 
life and purification.
2. Deciphering: Applying the "Fiqh of the Tongue" approach
Let's go beyond dictionaries and delve directly into the structure of the word as presented by the 
"Qur'anic tongue", by analyzing its literal pairs - the bladder - that make up the root -h-j-:
•	The first Muthanna: -alive- - the nucleus of life and consciousness
o	Haa -h-: A letter that denotes life, truth, briefing, essence.
o	Yaa -j-: A letter that indicates connection, continuity, certainty.
o	The kinetic meaning of Muthanna -alive-: When "life" interacts with 
"communication" -j-, the meaning  of "a state of conscious connected life" is 
produced. This Muthanna is the essence  of the word "living", and it does not mean 
merely the biological pulse, but  the awareness of existence and truth.
•	The second Muthanna: -Yi- - Consolidation and empowerment of the trait
o	Repetition of the yaa -y-: It is useful to confirm, consolidate, mastery, and 
transform the situation into a constant and deep characteristic.
o	The kinetic meaning of Muthanna -yi-: The repetition of J communication and 
certainty confirms the firmness of this attribute and makes it a permanent and 
empowered state in the soul.
3. The birth of "modesty": the fence of the living soul
When combining the connotations of the couple, we arrive at the profound structural definition:  
"Modesty is not just a transient emotion, but a state of deep and firm awareness of life and truth – 
living – that results in protective boundaries and an emotional fence that preserves the dignity and 
balance of the soul."
It is a direct indicator of the degree of "life" of the heart. The more "alive" and aware of God the heart 
is, the stronger and more firmly its emotional fence – modesty – becomes. This deep understanding 
explains why "timidity" is a conscious volitional behavior that proceeds from this state, why "revival" 
by the Qur'an and dhikr is what nourishes and develops this root, and why modesty from the "living"  
God is the highest degree of consciousness.
4. Existential Conclusion: He who has no shame is dead
We return to conclude this foundational section with the quote with which we begin almost from the 
words of Ibn al-Qayyim, which now seems clearer and more profound after our journey of 
deconstructing the root:  
"Modesty is derived from life... Whoever has no shame is dead in this world and miserable in the 
Hereafter." 
This is not just a preaching phrase, but a report of an existential truth. He who has lost modesty has 
not lost just a beautiful creation, but has lost contact with the essence of life itself. His heart is dead, 
though his body walks among people. This moral death is the beginning of real misery in this world, 
and the direct cause of loss in the hereafter. It is the inevitable consequence of those who uproot life 
from their soul.

CHAPTER TWO: MODESTY IN DICTIONARIES AND HERITAGE - COMPARISON AND 
INTEGRATION
Introduction to the chapter:  
Having delved into the structure of the word "modesty" and revealed its intrinsic relationship to "life" 
and consciousness, we now move on to see how this structural vision complements what is stated in 
our rich Islamic heritage. In this chapter, we will put our radical understanding of the word side by 
side with the hadiths of the Prophet and the sayings of scholars, to discover that what the 
"jurisprudence of the tongue" revealed about the structure of the word, is what was stated by 
revelation and realized by the wise throughout the ages.

1. Modesty in the eyes of linguists:
•	Review the definitions of dictionaries – Lisan al-Arab, language standards – that link modesty 
to the "opposite of death" and "constriction from the ugly".
•	Criticism and analysis: These definitions describe the result and behavior, while the 
"jurisprudence of the tongue" approach reveals the cause and internal driver – the life of the 
heart.
2. Modesty idiomatically: from psychological description to moral function
Having seen how the word's linguistic root directly links "modesty" to "life," we now move on to see 
how Islamic scholars formulated this concept into precise terminological definitions. The definitions of 
the predecessors and scholars, although their phrases differ, but they agreed in their meaning, and 
integrated to describe this creation from its different angles, revealing its psychological nature and 
behavioral function.
A. Psychological nature: conscious contraction
Imam al-Jurjani in "Definitions" provides us with an accurate description of the internal emotional 
state that represents the essence of modesty, saying that it is:  "the contraction of the soul from 
something and leaving it careful not to blame it."
This definition focuses on the psychological dimension. Modesty starts from within, from a sense of 
contraction, change and brokenness that a person feels. But it is not just an unconscious negative 
emotion, but a "purposeful" contraction. It is associated with "caution against blame," whether that 
blame is from God, from people, or from the soul itself. It is a "conscious" contraction that precedes 
the action and leads to "leaving".
B. Behavioral function: emitter and inhibitor
Imam Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani comes to translate this psychological state into a practical behavioral 
function, providing a comprehensive definition that is considered one of the best that has been said 
about modesty, as he says that it is: "a creation that avoids the ugly and prevents negligence in the 
right of the right."
This definition defines modesty as having two complementary functions:
1.	Negative function -prevention and avoidance-: it is the force that prevents its owner from 
indulging in ugliness and vices. It acts as a moral "brake" or "brake" that controls the 
impulses of the soul.
2.	Positive function -resurrection and urge-: an aspect that many may overlook. Modesty not 
only prevents evil, but  also inspires doing good. Whoever is ashamed of God to see him as 
negligent is driven by his life to perform duties, charity in worship, and fulfillment of rights. It 
is an "engine" towards perfection.
c. Integrated image: inside out
When we put the definition of Jurjani next to the definition of Ibn Hajar, we have a three-dimensional 
image of modesty:
•	Modesty begins  with a conscious psychological "contraction" -Jurjani-.
•	This contraction translates into a dual function: "avoiding" the ugly, and "preventing" from 
shortening -Ibn Hajar-.
•	In doing so, he "resurrects" to do the favor and perform the rights -Ibn Hajar-.
It is not just a negative "abandonment", but a "abandonment" accompanied by a positive "action". 
This picture is in perfect harmony with our conclusion that modesty stems from the "life" of the heart; 
the living being not only escapes harm, but actively pursues its own goodness and development. Thus, 
modesty not only prevents vice, but is the driving force towards virtue.

3. Modesty and Faith: The Fruit of a Living Heart
If, as we have established, modesty stems from "life", what gives the heart its true life? The answer 
comes clearly in the legal texts: it is faith. The relationship between modesty and faith is not an 
ordinary relationship of conjugation, but rather a relationship of "cause to effect" and "origin to 
branch." This is what Imam Ibn al-Qayyim reveals to us when he links linguistic analysis with the 
transmission evidence:
"Modesty is derived from life, the living heart is its owner alive, there is modesty that prevents it 
from ugliness, the life of the heart is the one that prevents ugliness that corrupt the heart, and this 
is why the Prophet (peace and blessings of Allaah be upon him) said: -Modesty is from faith-."
This adorable connection shows us the mechanism accurately:
•	Faith brings life to the heart.
•	The life of the heart naturally produces modesty.
•	Modesty,  in turn, prevents from ugly things that kill the heart.
Thus, we find ourselves before an integrated circle of life and light. The hadith "Modesty is a division 
of faith" is not merely a classification of creation within the system of faith, but a report of an organic 
truth: modesty is a branch that can only grow on the tree of faith that quenches the heart with life.

4. Modesty and reason: the seed of goodness and the basis of thinking
The impact of modesty does not stop at the limits of faith and heart, but extends to form the basis of 
sound reason and correct thinking. If it is faith that gives the heart its life, then modesty is what gives 
the mind its insight. Imam Ibn Hibban states this astonishing fact by saying:
"It is the duty of the wise to be modest, because it is the root of reason, the sowing of good, leaving 
it the root of ignorance, and the sowing of evil."
This saying moves modesty from mere feeling to being:
•	"The origin of the mind": The intellect that is not ashamed is a damaged mind, does not 
distinguish between the ugly and the good, and does not realize the consequences of things. 
Modesty is what gives the mind its "moral standard" on which it thinks.
•	"Sowing goodness": All good that a person does, whether honesty, honesty or generosity, is 
watered from the source of modesty.
•	"Leaving him the root of ignorance":  the absence of modesty is not just a lack of politeness, 
but an absolute "ignorance", because it means the absence of awareness of God, the 
absence of awareness of the value of the soul, and the absence of awareness of the 
consequences of actions.

5. Modesty in Prophecies: The Timeless Moral Law
The centrality and authenticity of modesty manifests itself not only in its being part of faith and the 
origin of reason, but also in being a human value that transcends time and laws. It is not a creation 
created by Islam, but it is a remnant of the light that people realized from the words of the first 
prophecies, as the Prophet (peace and blessings of Allaah be upon him) tells us in the hadith narrated 
by Abu Mas'ud:
"I'm going to say, 'I'm going to say, 'I'm going to be a man.'
This timeless hadith confronts us with fundamental truths:
1.	Universality of creation: Modesty is an innate human value, to which all heavenly messages 
have agreed to call.
2.	It is the law of control: this hadith is not permissible, but rather a report of the impact of the 
absence of the "governing law". Modesty is the "moral constitution" of the human soul, and 
if this constitution is abolished, absolute chaos prevails, and anything goes. It is the last 
criterion, and if it falls, all standards fall.

Conclusion:  
In this chapter, we have seen how our linguistic vision of modesty as a "life energy" is confirmed and 
deepened when placed in the context of Islamic heritage. Modesty is not merely a social creation, but 
the fruit of faith, the origin of reason, and the eternal law of prophecy. It is the central value around 
which the goodness of heart, mind and behavior rallies, and in its absence the whole system 
collapses. Now that this concept has taken root in us, we are ready to see its practical manifestations 
in the Qur'anic landscape.

CHAPTER TWO: MANIFESTATIONS OF MODESTY IN THE QUR'ANIC SCENE
Door Introduction:
If the first chapter reveals to us the "theory" at the root of the word modesty, then this chapter is the 
field of "application". Here, we move from digging into the structure of the word to witnessing its 
movement in the Qur'anic text. The Qur'an does not present its concepts as abstract rules, but 
weaves them into living stories, human attitudes, and divine instructions. In this section, we will see 
how "modesty" – meaning as a force emanating from the life of the soul – is embodied in three 
central Qur'anic scenes, each of which reveals a different facet of this virtue. Great.


AL-FASAL AL-'AWWAL: AL-HAYYA AL-ILAHI - (WA'L-'A'L-'A'A'L-'A'A'I'L-YA'A'L-
TA'A'I'I'MIN AL-HUQA'I)"
Chapter Introduction:  
We begin our journey in the manifestations of modesty in the highest and most important place: the 
place of truth Almighty. Talking about "modesty" as a divine attribute may seem puzzling at first 
glance, especially since the Qur'an uses the negation in the two most famous places in this context. 
How do we understand the negation of an attribute that is originally perfection, and how do we prove 
it in a manner befitting the majesty of God? This chapter is an attempt to dive into this precise 
meaning, to understand that the denial of modesty from God is the same as proving His perfection, 
and that His proof of Him He is the eye of proving His mercy and generosity.

1. Negation of timidity to prove the perfection of truth and statement
The denial of "timidity" from God Almighty is explicitly mentioned in two places in his dear book, both 
of which came in an educational and legislative context, revealing a great rule of God's absolute 
perfection.
•	The first position: in the context of proverbs -Al-Baqarah: 26-
﴿ God is not ashamed to strike an example of a mosquito and above it...﴾ 
This verse came in response to the denunciation of the hypocrites and disbelievers for God to strike 
proverbs with creatures they see as despicable like flies and spiders. The divine answer was decisive: 
God, in the place of statement and clarification of wisdom, does not suffer from the "timidity" of 
human beings that prevents them from using the small thing to prove the big truth. Greatness is not 
in the magnitude of the parable, but in the depth of its significance. The negation of timidity here is 
an affirmation of the perfection of God's wisdom and statement, and that He does not abstain from 
any means of guidance for His creation.
•	The second position: in the context of the statement of truth -parties: 53-
﴿...If that harm the Prophet was ashamed of you, and Allah is not ashamed of the truth,  
this passage came in the context of disciplining believers with the etiquette of visiting the house of 
the Prophet (peace and blessings of Allaah be upon him). While the Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allaah be upon him), for the perfection of his creation, was ashamed of embarrassing his guests, God 
Himself took over the statement of this legislative right. As Dr. Hessa Al-Hawas points out, the 
negation of timidity here means that "God does not refrain from explaining and revealing it." Human 
modesty may sometimes prevent him from telling the truth, but the truth is glorified by nothing 
prevents him from Show right.
Conclusion:  The negation of "timidity" in these two places is not a negation of the quality of 
perfection, but a negation of the human imperfection that may be associated with this feeling. It is an 
affirmation that God, in the place of legislation, statement and teaching, acts with absolute perfection 
that is not obscured by a veil or prevented by an obstacle.

2. Proof of modesty befitting His Majesty: modesty of generosity and mercy
If the Qur'an has denied God "timidity" in its human sense that prevents the truth, the Sunnah of the 
Prophet has proven to him another "modesty", which is an attribute of absolute perfection worthy of 
His majesty and greatness. This makes it clear to us that the chapter on names and attributes is 
tawqifi, we prove what God and His Messenger have proved, and we deny what He has denied.
The Prophet (peace and blessings of Allaah be upon him) said in the hadith narrated by the 
Companions of the Sunan:
"I 
 
'm going to say, 'I'm going to be a'l-wa'l-a'i', 'i'm going to be a'a'l-wa'l-'a'i'a', 'i'm going to say, 'I'm 
going to be a'i'a', 'i'm going to say, 'I'm going to say, i'm going to'.
Here, we are faced with another meaning of modesty, not the modesty of change and brokenness, 
but as scientists describe it, it is "modesty of generosity, righteousness of existence and majesty". It 
is modesty that stems from the greatness of His mercy and the perfection of His goodness.
•	Modesty of the one who violated the cover of his slave: He is "Hayy Steer", he is ashamed 
of exposing his disobedient slave, so he covers him in this world, then pardons him and 
forgives him in the hereafter, and this is from the perfection of his generosity.
•	Modesty of the response of Abdo questioner: He is "Hayy Karim", ashamed of the 
perfection of his generosity to return the hands of his servant that extended to him with 
supplication empty and disappointed.
As Ibn al-Qayyim sums up this wonderful meaning, the modesty of God Almighty is "leaving what is 
not commensurate with the breadth of His mercy, the perfection of His goodness, His generosity, 
and the greatness of His forgiveness and His dream." It is not like the modesty of the created ones, 
but a modesty worthy of the one who is (there is nothing like him, who is the hearing and seeing).

Summary of the chapter:
Contemplating the concept of "divine modesty" leads us to an integrated and profound 
understanding. God Almighty is "not ashamed" to reveal the truth and guide it, for the perfection of 
His justice and wisdom. At the same time, he is "alive" ashamed to tear the cover of his servant or 
return his questioner, for the perfection of his generosity and mercy.
This understanding sets the believer a rule of behavior: to have modesty that makes him ashamed of 
God to see him in disobedience, and at the same time does not prevent this modesty from speaking 
the truth or commanding good. It is the delicate balance between mercy with creation and rigor in 
principle, which is best manifested in the creation of prophets, as we will see in the next chapter.

CHAPTER TWO: PROPHETIC MODESTY - PERFECTION IN CREATION
Chapter Introduction:  
God chose His prophets and messengers from the most complete people in creation and creation, and 
decorated them with noble morals to be a good example for their people. At the heart of this 
prophetic ethical system is the creation of "modesty" as an inherent quality and a prominent feature. 
The soul chosen by God to receive His revelation is necessarily a "living" soul in the highest degree of 
life and consciousness, and this is the source of authentic modesty. In this chapter, we trace the 
manifestations of this prophetic creation in the stories of three of the honorable prophets as 
mentioned in the Qur'an and Sunnah, to see how modesty was part of Integral to their personalities 
and attitudes.

1. The modesty of Adam - peace be upon him: the modesty of instinct and felony
We begin with the first man and the first prophet, Adam (peace be upon him). The Holy Qur'an 
presents us with the first human attitude in which modesty is manifested after the first offense:
[Fa'l-ma'a'l-sha'aa'aa'a'aa'. Al-Araf: 22.
Rushing to cover the 'awrah after it has been exposed is not just a physical act, but an expression of a 
deep emotional state. It is  the "modesty of instinct" that led to a sense of aversion to exposure, 
which Ibn al-Qayyim also calls "the modesty of the felony", that is, the modesty that follows the 
feeling of guilt and negligence.
•	Significance of the scene: This attitude establishes modesty as an authentic and central 
human feeling. Human common sense, before it is polluted, is ashamed of error and rushes 
to cover it up and repent of it. The action of Adam and Eve is the first practical lesson in that 
modesty is the natural reaction of the living spirit when faced with its deficiency and 
shortcoming.

2. The modesty of Moses - peace be upon him: the modesty of concealment and literature
The Qur'an and Sunnah provide us with multiple images of the modesty of the Prophet Moses, peace 
be upon him, revealing two important aspects of this creation:
•	Modesty of concealment and chastity:  
In the story of the Israelites accusing him in his body, the Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allaah be upon him) describes him as saying:
"Moses was a man who was alive and steasurable, seeing nothing ashamed of his skin..." -Agreed-
Moses 
' modesty led him to exaggerate the coverings of his body, not out of fear or awe, but an original 
creation in him. This teaches us that modesty pushes its owner to chastity and concealment, which is 
a characteristic of the people of virility and virtue.
•	Modesty of literature with God:  
In the story of Mi'raj, after he hesitated between his Lord and Moses (peace be upon him) to 
ease the prayer, the Prophet (peace and blessings of Allaah be upon him) said that he had 
reached a stage where Moses said to him: "Return to your Lord and ask him to lighten up", 
and he replied:
"I have been ashamed of my Lord from what I have disagreed with." 
This is the modesty of reverence and exaltation. It is the feeling that urgency in demand may not be 
appropriate in the presence of the King of Kings, the pinnacle of politeness with the Creator, and 
stems from the knowledge of the servant as much as his Lord and himself.

3. Modesty in the perfection of the Muhammadan peace be upon him
The creation of modesty reaches its peak and completeness in the personality of the Seal of the 
Prophets and Messengers, Prophet Muhammad, peace be upon him, whom Abu Sa'id al-Khudri 
described as "more modest than the Virgin in her boudoir." This creation was manifested in all 
aspects of his life:
•	In his dealings with people: As we have seen in the verse of Surat Al-Ahzab (He is ashamed 
of you), his life prevented him from hurting the feelings of his companions, even if it was a 
hardship for him. It is  the "modesty of generosity" in which one overcomes one's comfort in 
honor of those around him.
•	In his pedagogical curriculum: his life was not just a personal creation, but an educational 
curriculum. The Prophet (peace and blessings of Allaah be upon him) said: "Every religion 
has a creation, and Islam created modesty." This creation has made the identity of the 
nation and the title of its religion.
•	In being part of the faith: by constantly emphasizing that "modesty is a division of faith" 
and "modesty can only come with good", the Prophet (peace and blessings of Allaah be 
upon him) linked this apparent behavior to the inner truth of faith, confirming our conclusion 
that modesty is the fruit of the life of the heart with the light of faith.

Summary of the chapter:
Following the biography of the honorable prophets reveals to us that modesty is not a marginal 
characteristic, but a central and authentic creation in the personalities of the people of perfection. It 
manifests itself in their instinct, in their relationship with their Lord, and in their dealings with people. 
They have given us living examples of active modesty, modesty that preserves and does not paralyze, 
disciplines and does not prevent the truth. They are the role models that teach us that the way to 
have this creation begins with reviving the heart with faith, and adorning the soul with good morals, 
as we will see in the applied models. Next.

CHAPTER THREE: MODESTY IN WOMEN - THE TITLE OF CHASTITY AND BEAUTY
Chapter Introduction:  
If modesty is a creation that is required of everyone, then in a woman it takes on a deeper and more 
beautiful dimension. The Qur'an, in regulating human relations, does not immortalize the name or 
form of this woman, but chooses one attribute to make her a title: modesty. This divine choice 
presents this creation as a central value in the personality of the virtuous woman, and as the highest 
honor adorning her.

1. The Immortal Scene: Analysis of the Rhetoric of the Situation
At the heart of the story of Moses , the Qur'an paints us a living portrait, not of one woman, but of 
two women standing timidly at the water of a debtor.
(Wa'l-ma'aa wa'l-ma'aa', 'a'm'a', 'a'm'a'a', 'a'l-'a'a', 'a'm'a', 'a'l-'a', 'a'm'a'a', 'a'm'a', 'a'm'a'd'a'a', 'a'd'a', 
'a'm'a'a', 'a'm'a'a', 'a'd'a', 'a'l-'a', 'a'm'a', 'a'l-'a', 'a'l-'a'a', 'a'l-'a', 'a'l Al-Qass: 23.
Here begins the first lesson in modesty. They "melting" their sheep, that is, preventing them and 
pushing them from mixing with the shepherds' sheep. It is a negative attitude on the surface, but 
positive in essence; it stems from modesty that prevents them from crowding out men. Then comes 
the dialogue to reveal deeper layers of politeness and modesty.
•	Justification for going out of necessity:  
When Moses asked them "What is wrong with you", their answer came preemptively for any 
suspicion: "They said, 'We will not water until the shepherd is issued, and our father is a 
great sheikh.'" They not only justify why they were late, but why they left in the first place. It 
is as if they mean: we are here not to go out and work, but out of compulsion, because there 
is no man in our house who does this task. This establishes the correct concept of women's 
work, which is for a real need while maintaining modesty controls.
•	The eloquence of the living call:  
After Moses watered them, one of them came to invite her father, and here the eloquence 
of modesty is manifested in its most wonderful form: "One of them came to him walking 
timidly, and she said that my father is calling you...﴾.
o	Attribution of the invitation to the father: You did not say "I am calling you", but 
"My father is calling you". She assigned the act to her guardian, thus breaking any 
personal relationship, and placing the meeting in its official and respectful 
framework.
o	Clarification of purpose: "May the reward of what you have watered for us" 
clarified the purpose of the invitation accurately, to remove any suspicion or 
suspicion, and confirm that the goal is to return the favor, not to lure or deceive.

2. Modesty as a motive for reform and physiognomy
This woman was not just a mass of passive modesty, her modesty was a motivation for positive 
thinking and reform. When she returned to her father, she "whispered in his ear," as the preacher 
portrays, with a proposal to solve the problem at its root:
(Ya'aa'a'aa'aa', 26.
•	Wanting to return to the original: Her proposal to hire a man to do the work is an expression 
of her desire to "get rid of working outside the home" and return to the natural place where 
it is maintained. Her modesty did not make her bear the wrong situation, but pushed her to 
search for the right solution.
•	Physiognomy in the evaluation of men: In a few words, I summarized the two most 
important qualities of a working man:  the strength - which she saw in his ability to water 
alone - and the honesty - which she sensed in his disregard for his limb and not paying 
attention to it on the way -. Modesty did not pervade her insight, but made her more 
accurate in observation and evaluation.

3. When modesty is absent.. countries fall
The Qur'anic emphasis on women's modesty is not only an individual or social issue, but an indicator 
of the nation's immunity and immunity. The absence of this creation is a harbinger of the erosion of 
society from within, making it easy prey for its enemies.
Enemies have recognized this fact throughout the ages. One of the stories told in this regard is what 
al-Khatib said about al-Mu'izz al-Fatimid, who was afraid of Egypt's invasion of its power, until he 
received frequent news about "the disregard of the women of the Ikhshidid state for religion, their 
expose, and their departure." Only then did he know that this society had become "ruined" from 
within, and would not withstand it, so he invaded it with confidence.
This historical story, although in need of scrutiny, offers a profound symbolic significance: the nation's 
true fortress is not only in its military equipment, but also in its moral cohesion, and the "modesty of 
women" is one of the most important pillars of this fortress. If this pillar collapses, it will be easier for 
enemies to penetrate the entire nation.
Abstract:  
Through the model of Shoaib's daughter, the Qur'an presents modesty as an effective force and an 
integrated system in the personality of women. It is politeness of conduct, precision of logic, 
motivation for reform, and source of physiognomy. It is not just a personal adornment, but a fence 
that preserves its dignity, and an essential pillar in building the immunity of the whole society.

CHAPTER FOUR: THE MODESTY OF PROPHET JOSEPH: THE STRENGTH OF CHASTITY AND 
THE GRACE OF FORGIVENESS
Chapter Introduction:
If the stories of the prophets represent beacons of morality, then the story of Joseph (peace be upon 
him) is an integrated lesson in "active modesty", modesty that is not limited to a feeling of 
contraction, but manifests itself as a positive force that prevents it, and a moral compass that guides 
behavior in the darkest moments of strife and the most powerful situations. For Joseph, modesty was 
not a passivity or helplessness, but a shield of chastity, a key to wisdom, and a source of forgiveness. 
In this chapter, we will trace the manifestations of this great creation at three key points in his life, to 
see how modesty is a "preventive force" against immorality, a "driving force" toward perfection, and 
a "survival strategy" that leads its owner to safety.
1. Modesty from Allah in the event of fitnah: "God forbid" is a fence for the soul
The culmination of the test of modesty is when the causes of impiety are prepared and the eyes of 
the censors are absent. In this situation, which the Qur'an depicts in its smallest detail (and the one in 
whose house he is in thought of himself and the doors are closed), we see modesty in its purest form 
and its strongest manifestation.
Joseph's response, peace be upon him, was not just a passing rejection, but a living and shy refuge 
from God: "God forbid that my Lord is my best resting place." This saying reveals the roots of his 
modesty:
•	Modesty stemming from the knowledge of God (He is my Lord): His invocation of God's 
lordship was not only an evocation of fear of punishment, but an evocation of the status of 
charity and bounty. Modesty here is the fruit of a living heart that realizes that the one who 
has done good to him in his resting place does not deserve to be offended against him. It is a 
practical application of Ibn Hajar's definition of modesty as "preventing negligence in the 
right of the righteous."
•	Modesty as a conscious force: He did not say "I am ashamed", but resorted to "God forbid", 
moving the battle from the level of the desires of the soul to the level of protection with the 
divine fortress. This shows that true modesty is not a blind instinctive emotion, but a 
conscious decision to take refuge in God from the evil of the soul. His life was the fence that 
separated him from immorality, the shield that protected him when they preempted the 
door.
2. Modesty of creation when able: pardon conceals and does not disregard
If the first attitude showed modesty as a blocking force, the second, when God empowered Joseph on 
earth and his brothers came, showed him as a driving force for virtue and perfection. After years of 
injustice and harm, Joseph was at the height of his ability to heal and shame, but he chose another 
path that stemmed from his own nobility and modesty.
When he introduced them himself, he did not remind them of their crime except for a hint, and then 
immediately opened the door for forgiveness and cover-up: "He said, "Do not reproach you today, 
God will forgive you, and He is the most merciful of the merciful." This is the "modesty of generosity" 
and "modesty of nobility". A dignified and living soul is ashamed to injure or shame those who have 
become weak and broken, even if they were unjust in the past.
•	Modesty that inspires benevolence: He not only pardoned, but called for forgiveness, and 
turned blame into prayer. This embodies the positive side of modesty that "inspires doing 
the good".
•	Modesty that reaches what has been cut: While the immoral people cut off what God 
commanded him to deliver, the tangerine modesty works to reconnect what has been cut off 
from the bonds of the womb, with covering, forgiveness and charity.
3. Modesty as a survival strategy: "Prison is loved by me"
The truest expression of the centrality of modesty in Joseph's value system is his conscious choice 
between fleeting pleasure and resident torment, between temporary hardship and permanent 
survival. His saying, "The Lord of the prison is dearer to me than what they call me to", is not a prayer 
of despair, but a survival strategy based on a visionary vision given to him by his life.
•	Modesty is a compass for choice: The living heart with the light of modesty sees 
consequences before actions. Joseph realized with his modesty that imprisonment, with all 
its pain, is purer and more beloved to God than disobedience, and that this choice is the only 
way to maintain his connection with his Lord.
•	From the ordeal of modesty to the grant of elevation: This choice, which seemed to be a 
worldly loss, was the gateway through which fate led him to achieve elevation and 
empowerment. It was in prison that the journey of interpretation of visions that eventually 
led him to the throne of Egypt began. The price of modesty was a prison, but his reward was 
survival, kingship and wisdom.
Summary of the chapter:
The story of Joseph (peace be upon him) proves that modesty is not weakness or isolation, but an 
effective and multidimensional moral force. It is the shield of chastity in the face of strife, the 
motivation of generosity in the hour of ability, and the compass of wisdom at the crucial crossroads. It 
is a story that confirms the central truth of this book: that modesty emanating from the life of the 
heart is the key to salvation and elevation in this world and the hereafter.

CHAPTER FIVE: THE MODESTY OF MARY - PEACE BE UPON HER - THE MANIFESTATION 
OF THE IMMACULATE INSTINCT
Chapter Introduction:
In the record of immortals written in the Holy Qur'an, Maryam (peace be upon her) assumes a unique 
position, not only as the mother of a prophet, but as a sign of purity and chastity. While the Qur'an 
immortalizes a woman who owes modesty in her gait, it immortalizes Mary as a model in which the 
"instinct of modesty" is embodied in her highest and purest form. The story of Mary is the story of 
modesty that is not only acquired, but born with the pure soul, and is its title and guardian. This 
chapter is a reflection on two crucial points in her life, to see how this innate modesty manifests itself 
as the first line of defense in solitude, and as a deep existential feeling vis-à-vis society.
1. Innate modesty in solitude: the refuge of piety (if you are pious)
The Holy Qur'an depicts a surprising and difficult scene: a holy girl, in her solitude and worship, is 
surprised by the sudden appearance of a being in the form of a man of full manhood (representing 
her as human beings together). Her immediate reaction reveals deep layers of entrenched innate 
modesty:
•	Seeking refuge before asking: Why ask "Who are you?" or "What do you want?". Her first 
reaction was to build a protective barrier and resort to divine protection (she said, I seek 
refuge in mercy from you). This spontaneous act is the response of common sense that 
repels any situation in which there is suspicion and threat to chastity.
•	Invoking the moral deterrent (if you are pious): Here lies the genius of Marian modesty. She 
did not shout or accuse him, but addressed him to the highest good that could be in him, 
which is "piety". I linked modesty and piety in one phrase, as if to say: "If you have an iota of 
piety and fear of God in your heart, it will prevent you from harming me." It is the wisdom of 
a living woman who uses the weapon of morality rather than the weapon of conflict, 
defusing the situation politely and firmly.
2. Existential modesty in confrontation: the wish of concealment (I wish I died)
Al-Muhna'ah al-Thaniyah kanta ashad wa'at, wahi mu'aja'ah al-mujtama ba'ayyah al-ilhiyyah la 
yadrakha al-'aqil al-bashari al-mahdood. It is a matter of fact that it is a matter of great concern.
This wish must be deeply understood worthy of its stature:
•	It is not a fear of God's destiny: her statement was not an objection to God's command to 
which she surrendered, but an expression of the utmost psychological pain that the 
honorable and living soul can feel. Her perception of the looks of accusation and the 
harshness of tongues was more severe on her than the pain of labor itself.
•	Modesty as an existential value: For Mary, chastity and honor are not just a social value, but 
part of her being. Scratching this honor represents moral death, and that is why she wished 
for real death to live this moral death. The wish for death here is the absolute wish of 
"concealment".
•	The evidence of perfection, not lacking: The intensity of her pain from the perception of 
scandal is in itself the greatest proof of the perfection of her purity and the intensity of her 
modesty. A soul that does not care about people's eyes and accusations is a soul that has lost 
the sensitivity of modesty. Mary's soul was at the height of faith and moral sensitivity, and 
this made her pain deeper, and her esteem with God greater.
Summary of the chapter:
The character of Mary (peace be upon her) offers us a unique example of pure innate modesty. It is a 
modesty manifested as wisdom and firmness in solitude, and as a deep existential feeling in 
confrontation. It teaches us that modesty is not just a social creation, but an innate essence, a crown 
that adorns virtuous women, and proof of the perfection of herself and the purity of her soul. In her 
story, modesty rises from being a behavior to being a high rank of faith and a divine badge of honor.


CHAPTER THREE: FROM ETHICS TO KNOWLEDGE: MODESTY IS A CONDITION FOR 
UNDERSTANDING
-Applied Case Study: Reflecting on "Like a Mosquito" verses between imitation and renewal
Introduction to the chapter:  
– Here we explain that we will take the verses of "like a mosquito" as a central practical model for our 
theory, because they are the verses in which all the threads of research meet: modesty, 
understanding, delusion, and guidance.

CHAPTER ONE: THE TRADITIONAL PLATFORM - UNDERSTANDING THE PARABLE IN THE 
CONTEXT OF THE GREATNESS OF CREATION
The prevailing interpretation of the proverb of "mosquito" and its connotations -Al-Baqarah: 26-
•	Ayat al-'Ayyah: "O Allaah, i.e., i Al-Zayn al-Kaafruwa fa'i'l-qu'l-'u'l-ma'aa'i'a', 'A'd al-'A'l-
'a'a'i'a', 'A'd al-'A'l-'a'i'a', 'A'd al-'A'l-'A'a', 'A'l-'A'a'a', 'A'l-'A'l-'A'a'a', 'A'l-'A'a'i', 'A'l-'A'i', 'A'l-
'A'a'i', 'A'l-'A'a'a', 'A'l-'A'l-'A'a'i', 'A'l-'A'l-'A'a', 'A'l-'A'a'a', 'A'l-'A'l-'A'a'a', 'A'l-'A
•	The essence of the prevailing interpretation:
o	God is not ashamed: an affirmation that God Almighty does not refrain from setting 
an example for any creature, no matter how small or despicable it may seem in the 
eyes of men, because wisdom is not in the size of the parable but in its significance.
o	Mosquito and above: Referring to the well-known insect "mosquito", and "above" 
may mean what is larger than it, or what is more accurate and smaller than it, or 
what is more than it in some characteristic - such as contempt in the eyes of the 
deniers or perfection in creation -.
o	People's attitude: Believers are increasingly believing and believing that the truth is 
from God. The disbelievers ridicule and wonder about the intention, and they 
become even more misguided.
o	Delusion and guidance: The same parable is a reason for guidance for those who 
want it, and a reason for misguidance for those who have immorality and 
stubbornness in their hearts.
•	The deep connotations and meanings in this interpretation:
o	The greatness of God's power in his smallest creature: drawing attention to the 
miracle of creation even in a mosquito.
o	Challenging deniers and mockers: a response to those who denounced proverbial 
with creatures they see as trivial.
o	Faith test: Quranic proverbs reveal the constituents of the breasts.
o	Man's responsibility to understand: Guidance and delusion are linked to how man 
receives signs.
•	Criticism and analysis: This interpretation is clear and consistent with the appearance of the 
word and the context of the Qur'anic challenge. This is unanimous among the commentators. 
He may sometimes see that he focuses more on the miraculous aspect of the creature than 
other dimensions of the parable, but this does not negate its strength and coherence.

Immoral people and breaking the covenant - the consequences of refraining from the signs of God -Al-
Baqarah: 27-
•	 Al-'Ayyah: "Al-'Azin ya'a'l-qa'da'a'l-'aa'i'a'.
•	Link to the previous verse: This verse describes the "wicked" who are mentioned at the end of 
verse 26 as being likewise misled by God.
•	Characteristics of as received:
o	Breaking God's Covenant: The covenant here includes the innate covenant of faith, 
the covenants made to previous nations, and the covenant of faith in the apostles 
and books.
o	Severing what God has commanded to deliver: It includes cutting off wombs, 
severing ties with truth and guidance, separating the word of believers, and not 
following what God has revealed.
o	Corruption on earth: includes material corruption - such as injustice and murder - 
and moral corruption - such as spreading infidelity, misguidance and sins.
•	Deep connotations:
o	The close link between attitude towards the signs of God – such as the proverb – and 
practical and ethical behavior.
o	Immorality is not just a passing sin, but a way of life based on rebellion against 
God's commands.
o	The consequence of this immorality is the loss shown in this world and the hereafter.
•	The efforts of the contemplators:  The contemplators associate these attributes with those 
who offer to contemplate the Qur'an and follow its whims, and they see that the first step of 
immorality is to underestimate the signs and covenants of God.

Evidence of Divine Power and an Invitation to Reflection -Al-Baqarah: 28-29-
•	The ayat-e-ayatīn: "   There is a lot of truth that has been done, i.e.
•	Contextualization: After mentioning the condition of the wicked and their punishment, these 
verses come as a denunciation of disbelief and a reminder of the signs of power that require 
faith and thanksgiving.
•	Prevailing interpretation and semantics:
o	"You were dead, and I will revive you":
	Direct meaning: You were nihilistic – or sperm – so I created you and 
revived you in the worldly life.
	A deeper meaning referred to by some commentators - and compatible 
with some attempts at contemplation -: You were dead in hearts in 
ignorance and disbelief, and God revived you with the light of message and 
faith.
o	"Then He will kill you and then He will revive you": the well-known physical death, 
then the resurrection on the Day of Resurrection for reckoning.
o	The creation of the earth and the leveling of the heavens: signs of omnipotence 
and universal knowledge, and that everything in the universe is devoted to man and 
prepared for him.
•	The efforts of those who contemplate these verses:
o	Affirming that contemplating oneself and prospects is one of the strongest reasons 
for faith.
o	The link between material revival and moral revival - the revival of hearts with 
guidance -.
o	Inferring from these verses the oneness of God and His worthiness for worship.
1.	Proverb as a test of faith -Al-Baqarah: 26-:
o	Presentation of the prevailing interpretation of the mosquito parable -content point 
139.1-.
o	Analysis of its connotations: the greatness of God in the smallest of his creation, the 
challenge of the deniers, the experience of the hidden chests.
o	Critique and analysis: Demonstrating the strength and consistency of this 
interpretation, noting that it focuses more on the "ideal" itself than on its aftermath 
in a profoundly organic way.
2.	The delusion of the sinners: Anatomy of the state of symptoms -Al-Baqarah: 27-:
o	Linking the description of immoral people to the previous verse as mentioned in -
point 139.2-.
o	Analysis of their attributes: breaking the covenant, cutting off what God 
commanded him to deliver, corruption on earth.
o	Significance: Proving that the attitude towards the ayatollahs is not an abstract 
intellectual position, but rather a revealing of an integrated ethical way of life.
3.	The Cosmic Argument: From the Mosquito to the Heavens -Al-Baqarah: 28-29-:
o	Analyzing the context of the verses as a compelling argument against the 
disbelievers after exposing their approach -the content of point 139.3-.
o	The link between material and moral revival, between the creation of the mosquito 
and the creation of the universe.

CHAPTER TWO: NEW HORIZONS - INTERPRETIVE READINGS OF THE PROVERB
Introduction to the chapter:  
Having established the traditional understanding of the "like a mosquito" verses and their context, we 
now move on to explore the new horizons that contemplators have tried to open in modern times. 
The vitality of the Qur'anic text lies in its ability to excite minds at all times, which prompts attempts 
to reread some concepts beyond what the early commentators settled on. In this chapter, we will 
present two types of these hermeneutic attempts:  The first is radical and grandiose, and the second 
is more balanced and symbolic, and we will analyze and critique each of them in the light of the 
approach of "jurisprudence of the tongue" and the controls of reflection, to distinguish between 
renewal that destroys, and contemplation that builds.

1. Radical interpretation: the hypothesis of "Bawsa" as a symbol of cognitive disorder
The arena of contemporary reflection has witnessed the emergence of a radical proposition that 
completely reconstructs the verse of the proverb, offering a different interpretation of each of its 
basic vocabulary. This proposition is based on the following hypotheses:
A. Deconstructing the hypothesis:
•	A first linguistic hypothesis -origin-: the claim that the origin of the word in manuscripts is 
"Bawsa" -Balsad-, and that it derives from the root "Baas", which indicates turmoil and 
instability. Thus, Baousa symbolizes "disorder in the understanding of verses."
•	A second linguistic hypothesis -verb-: The claim that the verb "does not live" does not mean 
the negation of modesty, but is derived from "life" and means "does not live" or "does not 
prove", that is, God does not approve this disorder but reveals the truth from it.
•	Interpret the context accordingly:  The meaning of the verse becomes that God does not 
approve of "disorder in understanding", and that the unbelievers are further misled by this 
disorder resulting from their lack of contemplation, while believers see in Him a call to seek 
the truth. And that the "wicked" are those who break the "covenant of contemplation" and 
corrupt in the "earth" – in the sense of land and contemplation.
B. Systematic Analysis and Criticism:
Although this proposition may seem attractive at first glance because of its emphasis on the 
importance of "reflection", when presented to the balance of the scientific and linguistic method, it 
shows signs of weakness and extreme costliness:
1.	Lack of manuscript evidence: The claim of changing a letter in a frequent text such as the 
Qur'an – from al-Sad to al-Daad – is a serious claim that requires conclusive physical evidence 
from the oldest Qur'anic manuscripts – such as the Sana'a or Samarkand manuscript – 
evidence that has not been presented. Without such evidence, the claim remains unfounded 
speculation.
2.	Clear linguistic costliness:  The interpretation of "not ashamed" in the sense of "does not 
revive" is a change of meaning without a strong linguistic witness from the uses of Arabs or 
other Qur'anic contexts. It contradicts the foreseeable and well-known meaning of the root, 
and ignores the morphological form of the verb -istaf-.
3.	Violation of consensus and frequency: This interpretation contradicts the consensus of the 
nation of readers, interpreters and linguists over the centuries, who transmitted the word in 
opposition and understood the act in the context of modesty. The singularity of such a 
statement makes it highly suspicious and breaks the connection with the cumulative 
understanding of the text.
Conclusion: This proposition, despite its attempt to present a new vision, is an example of an 
"arbitrary interpretation" that destroys the constants of language and text rather than revealing its 
secrets. It is a renewal that lacks scientific controls, and falls into the trap of giving the text meanings 
that its structure cannot bear.

2. Balanced reflection: the "mosquito" as a symbol of the easy action with great impact
Is it possible to find symbolic depth in the parable without changing the text or falling into abuse? This 
is offered by balanced hermeneutic reflection, which respects the appearance of the text but seeks to 
explore a deeper layer of meaning.
A. Pivotal Idea:
This contemplation does not deny that the "mosquito" is the known insect, but it believes that God 
did not choose it in vain, but because of its symbolic connotations. Judging from its phonetic 
involvement with the root of "some", and its characteristics – a small microcreature with a large 
annoying effect – the mosquito can symbolize "some",  "easy part" or "precise action" that can have 
enormous consequences.
B. Harmony with the context of the surah:
This symbolic understanding does not come out of nowhere, but is beautifully consistent with the 
central issues of Surat al-Baqarah and the entire Qur'an:
•	In Creation and Covenant: The creation of man begins with the encounter of "one to 
another", which is a partial act but creates life and nation. Adam (peace be upon him) was 
driven out of Paradise because of a delicate "mosquito" act – tasting the tree – that had a 
great effect.
•	In the refutation of the immoral: This understanding fits perfectly with the description of the 
immoral in the next verse. They do not break the covenant all at once, but it begins with 
complacency in "some"  orders, severing "some" ties, until they reach great corruption. A 
great sin begins with a small act.
•	In responsibility: the proverb becomes an invitation to pay attention to the subtleties of 
small actions – a look, a word, a bite – and their great impact on determining the destiny of 
man.
c. Features of this measure:
1.	Respects the text: does not change a letter and does not deny the literal meaning of the 
insect, but proceeds from it.
2.	Adds depth: draws a symbolic meaning from the proverb that serves the general purpose of 
the context.
3.	Strengthens the context: It connects the parable of the mosquito and the verses that follow 
it – the description of the immoral – with a close organic and logical bond.
4.	It remains in the circle of reflection: it does not assert that this is the only purpose, but 
presents it as a face of wisdom in choosing this parable, which opens the door to 
contemplation without destroying constants.

Summary of the chapter:
In this chapter we have seen two different models of new readings: an expensive model that attempts 
to impose a new meaning on the text by force, and a balanced model that attempts to interrogate the 
text to reveal the additional layers of its meaning. This comparative presentation emphasizes the 
importance of methodology in reflection; the goal is not merely to bring the new, but to reach a 
deeper and more integrated understanding of God's words, an understanding that combines respect 
for the building and a dive into meaning. Having reviewed these horizons, we are now prepared to 
gather all the threads in the next chapter, Let's present our ultimate vision that combines all these 
dimensions into an integrated theory.


CHAPTER THREE: INTEGRATED THEORY - MODESTY AS AN ANTIDOTE TO THE 
"MOSQUITO CONDITION"
1.	Re-read (not ashamed):
o	Combining the traditional meaning - not abstained - and the new methodological 
meaning - the year of conditional revival -.
2.	Redefining "mosquito":
o	Combining the literal meaning -insect-, the balanced symbolic meaning -the easy 
verb-, and the new methodological meaning -"the state of the lowest reception"-.
o	Conclusion: The "mosquito" represents the smallest truths revealed by God, which 
at the same time becomes a symbol of the lowest levels of understanding in the 
oblivious recipient.
3.	The Ultimate Solution: Modesty is the Key to Advancement "and Above"
o	Link all of the above: whoever loses "modesty" – in its life sense – falls into the 
cognitive "mosquito state" and goes astray.
o	Whoever has a "living" heart, driven by his life to overcome this situation and seek 
wisdom "above it", will be converted.
o	Thus, the verses "Like a Mosquito" become the most prominent applied Qur'anic 
evidence of the Biblical theory: modesty is the necessary condition for 
transcending dead understanding and entering the living understanding of the 
Book of God.
Sure. This is an essay designed to be an independent chapter or topic that can be added to the book, 
and it directly links the essence of modesty to the process of reflection, using all the ideas we have 
built. It can be placed in the third chapter as a chapter that prefaces the integrated theory, or as a 
conclusion to it.

CHAPTER THREE : THE COMPASS OF MODESTY - HOW IS CREATION THE KEY TO 
CONTEMPLATION?
In the contemplation of the Holy Qur'an, we often focus on mental and linguistic tools as 
prerequisites for understanding: knowledge of the reasons for revelation, understanding the 
abrogated and abrogated, and mastering the sciences of language and rhetoric. These are all 
indispensable tools, representing the "keys to science" with which we open the doors of the text. 
However, there is another key, one of my heart and conscience, that precedes all these tools and 
enables them to perform their function perfectly. This forgotten key is "modesty".
The association between modesty, as a behavioral creation, and contemplation, as a mental process, 
may seem strange at first glance. But if we return to the radical understanding we have established of 
modesty, as not merely a contraction from the ugly, but as the "energy of the living spirit" and the 
"indicator of consciousness of the heart", this relationship becomes logical and even inevitable.
The process of reflection is not just a cold mathematical analysis of texts, but a "living interaction" 
between the spirit of the contemplator and the spirit of the Qur'anic text. For this fruitful interaction 
to take place, the receiver – the heart of the contemplative – must be in a state of "life", a state 
expressed by the creation of modesty.
So how does modesty work as a key to contemplation and understanding of the Qur'an? This 
manifests itself through three main axes:
1. Modesty inherits "cognitive humility":  
The first obstacle to understanding God's words is cognitive arrogance, that is, the contemplative 
feeling that he is able to subject the text to his logic and limited tools, or to be satisfied with the 
appearance of understanding it. Here modesty comes in to act as an organizer. The living soul, which 
senses the greatness of the speaker (God Almighty), is impossible to deal with his words arrogantly or 
superficially. Her modesty from God bequeaths her "cognitive humility", and she realizes that the 
secrets of his words are far greater than what she knows. It is this humility that pushes her from mere 
"reading" to "contemplation", from "superficial understanding" to "diving" in search of God's will, and 
it is this that makes her always repeat with reverence: "Lord, increase me in knowledge."
2. Modesty protects against "hidden passions":  
Contemplation is not a neutral intellectual process, but is often interfered with by the passions and 
preconceived desires of the soul. The contemplative person may come to the text looking for 
evidence to actually justify it, or support its opinion, twisting the necks of the verses to serve his 
whims. Here, modesty acts as a "protective fence" against this fancy. A living man is ashamed of God 
to make his words a ride for his desires. This modesty makes him more sincere in his quest for the 
truth, so he comes to the Qur'an not to impose his opinion on him, but to ask, learn and surrender to 
his guidance, so that he will be like the believers: "We heard and obeyed."
3. Modesty opens the doors of "living understanding":  
this is the deepest impact. As we saw in the analysis of "Like a Mosquito", the Qur'an has levels of 
influence, it guides a lot and goes astray a lot. The key to this is the state of the recipient.
•	The dead heart (shameless): receives the proverb and remains in  the cognitive "mosquito 
state", sees only an insect, and only understands the apparent, mocks and denounces, and 
the proverb is a reason for increasing his delusion.
•	A living (modest) heart: receives the same parable, but its inner "life" and modesty from 
God prevent it from being content with this superficial level. It is his life that leads him to ask 
with reverence: "What did God want with this?" This question is not a question of 
denunciation, but  a question of exploration, and it is the beginning of a journey of 
contemplation that elevates him to an understanding of the "above" realms of wisdom and 
semantics.
Thus, modesty becomes the "antidote" that cures the disease of superficial understanding, the 
"compass" that guides the ship of contemplation towards the shores of deep meanings.
Conclusion:  
The way to understanding the Holy Qur'an is not a purely mental path, but a path in which reason 
mixes with heart, and knowledge with creation. Modesty is not merely a virtue that adorns the 
behavior of the contemplator, but a prerequisite that qualifies his heart to be worthy of receiving the 
lights of revelation. Without the "modesty" of the heart, we may have all the tools of interpretation, 
but we will remain on the shore of the text, collecting shells and counting pebbles. With modesty, we 
grant permission to dive into the depths of this coastless sea, to extract from it pearls of wisdom and 
treasures Knowledge that never runs out.


CHAPTER FOUR: MODESTY AND CIVILIZATIONAL IMPACT: FROM THE INDIVIDUAL 
TO SOCIETY
-Introduction to the Chapter-The  
value of any concept lies not only in its theoretical depth, but in its ability to make a real difference in 
people's lives. After our journey to uncovering the mysteries of "modesty" as a life energy and 
cognitive key, we dedicate this last chapter to reaping the fruits. How does this profound concept 
manifest itself in one's daily behavior? How does it contribute to shaping a virtuous and cohesive 
society? Here we will move from "theorizing" to "influencing", to see how the revival of the creation 
of modesty can be the beginning of the reform of the individual and the building of civilization.

CHAPTER ONE: THE INDIVIDUAL BETWEEN THE COMPASS OF MODESTY AND THE 
PRISON OF SHYNESS
1. Decisive differentiation: when disability is called modesty
Throughout the ages, no virtue has been as confused and confused as the virtue of modesty. Its noble 
name is often given to a state of reprehensible psychological weakness, so that differentiating 
between them is absolutely necessary to understand them correctly. Modesty is strength, shyness is 
weakness, and confusing them spoils both.
The nation's early scholars took notice of this common confusion and set a dividing line. Imam al-
Nawawi (may Allah have mercy on him) summarizes this problem and its answer, quoting imams such 
as Abu 'Amr ibn al-Salah:
"– It may be imposed on some people in that the one who has modesty may be ashamed to face 
the truth with those who honor him, so he leaves his command to do good and forbids him from 
evil... The answer to this is what a group of imams answered... This impediment that we have 
mentioned is not true modesty, but rather it is incompetence, shame and humiliation, but rather 
calling it modesty from the release of some people of custom, they launched it metaphorically 
because it resembles modesty.-"
This text puts our hands on the essence of the problem and its solution:
•	The problem: "modesty" may be used as an excuse to abandon duties, such as enjoining 
virtue.
•	Solution: This feeling that prevents one from doing the truth is not the praiseworthy legal 
modesty, but the "helplessness, shame and humiliation". It is a state of psychological 
weakness, which people have called "modesty" metaphorically, and confused for many.
True modesty, as we have established, stems from the life and strength of the heart, and pushes its 
owner to do the good and leave the ugly. As for this inhibitory feeling, it stems from the weakness 
and humiliation of the soul, preventing its owner even from doing the due favor. The first is a 
compass that guides to goodness, and the second is a prison that is locked up for doing it.
2. Modesty and seeking knowledge: a practical model for differentiation
There is no field in which the difference between praiseworthy modesty and blameworthy shyness is 
more evident than the field of seeking knowledge. Science requires boldness in questioning and 
courage in admitting ignorance, which may contradict the concept of shyness, but they never 
contradict the concept of true modesty.
The Islamic tradition has immortalized this golden rule in the words of Imam Mujahid (may Allah have 
mercy on him):
"Science is neither learned nor arrogant."
Mujahid put the "shy" – in the wrong sense – i.e. the shy – in the same hand with the "arrogant", both 
of whom are deprived of knowledge. The arrogant prevents him from admitting his ignorance, and 
the shy prevents him from showing his need for knowledge.
On the other hand, the Mother of the Believers, Aisha, may Allah be pleased with her, presents us 
with the practical example of modesty that does not prevent knowledge, but rather asks for it 
politely, in her praise of the women of the Ansar by saying:
"Yes, women are women of the Ansar, modesty did not prevent them from agreeing with them in 
religion."
Their life did not prevent them from asking about the most delicate matters of their religion and life, 
but they were asked politely and reverently. They possessed  the modesty of strength that drove 
them to agree, and they got rid of  the shame of weakness that would have deprived them of 
knowledge. And this is the practical application of difference: true modesty does not contradict 
knowledge, but is disciplined and directed towards it.

3. Wasafa-e-Karamiyyah: What is it that is "hayyah" or "khajulaah"?
•	The key is to glorify God in hearts: to teach children that the first reference is God's gaze, 
not people's. This develops proper modesty.
•	Boost self-confidence: Encourage initiative, express opinions, and accept mistakes as part of 
the learning process. This kills shyness.
•	Good example: The behavior of parents and educators is the most eloquent lesson. When 
they see active modesty in their role models, they learn it.
•	Conscious differentiation: using the terms "modesty" and "shyness" accurately, praising the 
former and correcting the latter gently and wisely.


CHAPTER TWO: MODESTY IN BUILDING SOCIETY - THE NATION'S BULWARK IN THE FACE 
OF ITS ENEMIES
Introduction to the chapter:  
Modesty is not just an individual virtue that affects its owner, but is the basis of the moral cohesion of 
the whole society. As we have seen, its absence is an indication of the erosion and collapse of the 
nation's immunity. In this chapter, we will review how the enemies of Islam realized this fact, and 
how they planned to strike this fortress by targeting women, and we will see how this targeting is not 
new but has historical evidence, and how God's Sunnah of destroying nations where immorality is 
common is past and does not lag behind.

1. The War on Modesty: Targeting Women to Destroy Society
The attack on the modesty of Muslim women in the modern era was not random, but rather a 
systematic strategic targeting, based on a deep understanding of their central role in building the 
family and society. As stated in the sermon:
"When our enemies knew about the status of women in the home and that they raise their 
upbringing... They knew that there was weakness in this woman, and that if they corrupted her, 
they corrupted the Muslim family, and then they corrupted the Muslim community."
The enemies of Islam have clearly expressed this strategy in their writings and protocols, including 
their statements that exude hostility:
•	"A cup and a Ghanaian do more to destroy the Muhammadan nation than a thousand 
cannons."
•	"We must work so that morality collapses everywhere and facilitates our control."
•	"I like that Hollywood has influenced the present generation of Muslims more than 
religious schools have influenced them."
They understand that depletion of morality is more deadly than draining money, and that corrupting 
one woman is more dangerous than bombing a military site. To achieve this, they used pernicious 
methods to portray indecency as "freedom and elevation," likening a liberated woman to a "hand-
tossing volleyball," ostensibly at the top, but in fact without sovereignty or dignity.

2. Gradient in indecent assault: step by step strategy
The demolition of an edifice of virtue as entrenched as modesty is not done all at once, but through a 
policy of "step by step" and gradual normalization with vice. Our contemporary history offers us an 
eloquent lesson in how to apply this strategy:
•	The first step – breaking the barrier – "When the first Muslim woman came out dressed... 
Some of them said, "Let her, what would harm us if one woman went out?""
•	The second step – gradual abdication – "When the first woman shortened her dress an 
inch... They said, "What prevents her from wearing socks underneath?""
•	The third step – rebelling against the marja'iyya – is: "When the sleeves fell short... They 
said, "Will the nation be corrupted?" Values are in the heart, and as long as values are in a 
woman's heart, what harms her?"
This malicious hierarchy, which begins with a small breach and then widens, is the mechanism for the 
destruction of virtue in societies. If the evil had been denied from the first step, the angle of deviation 
would not have widened, but it is negligence and negligence that opens the door wide to collapse.

3. The Sunnah of God in the Gentiles: When modesty is absent, torment comes
The relationship between the prevalence of immorality and the destruction of nations is not merely a 
social analysis, but an inevitable divine Sunnah, to which the Qur'an has pointed out and which 
history has preserved as evidence.
•	Divine Sunnah: The Prophet (peace and blessings of Allaah be upon him) said: "Immorality 
never appeared in a people, until they announced it, except for the plague and pains that 
were not past in their ancestors who passed away." Manifesting impiety is a direct invocation 
of God's punishment.
•	Historical witness -Pompeii Village-: God left us a verse that remains in the Italian "village of 
Pompei", which was a destination for the rich Romans to enjoy their lusts. When the volcano 
fled, it was flooded with lava, so the bodies of its people were preserved on the most 
heinous forms of immorality, to be an example to those behind them, and a material witness 
that the punishment of God is inevitably a reality in the villages where immorality is 
common.

4. Islamic awakening and facing challenges
In the face of this sweeping current, we must not lose sight of the side of hope. Praise be to God, 
today there is  a blessed "Islamic awakening" among Muslim women, and a return to the hijab and 
chastity. However, this does not negate the existence of major challenges, perhaps the most severe of 
which are:
•	"The tragedies of homes": It is the internal challenge of having parents and guardians who 
force their daughters to wear make-up and mix, and fight with them every seed of good. 
These represent the "inner enemy" who destroys the fortress from its foundation.
This places a great responsibility on every reasonable Muslim:
•	Duty of advice: Advise these parents and remind them of God's piety.
•	Duty to protect: Seek to protect these girls under duress and, if possible, provide them with 
safe shelter.
•	The duty of supplication: Pray for them with patience and steadfastness, as they are in a real 
jihad, and God does not waste the reward of the best work.
Summary of the chapter:  
Modesty is the first and last line of defense of the Muslim community. The enemies realized this and 
waged a relentless war against it, targeting women as the basis of the family. Understanding these 
strategies, arming yourself with historical awareness and divine laws, and supporting the blessed 
awakening, is the only way to preserve this impregnable fortress with which the nation preserves its 
identity and values.

CHAPTER THREE: SCOURGES AND LIMITS OF MODESTY - BETWEEN IMPOTENCE AND 
RUDENESS
Chapter Introduction:
In order to grasp the true value of a virtue, it is necessary to demarcate its boundaries and expose its 
false likenesses and destructive opposites. Just as light is known only in the face of darkness, the 
praiseworthy creation of modesty is manifested only when we distinguish it from the "helplessness" 
that wears its mask, and the "insolence" that represents its death. This chapter is a necessary attempt 
to elaborate a theoretical fence that protects this high morality from confusion and confusion, by 
dissecting three central states: reprehensible modesty which is impotence, misplaced modesty that is 
ignorance, and rudeness that is death to the heart.
1. Shame blameworthy: when impotence is called modesty
One of the greatest evils of virtues is to confuse them with similar shortcomings. The creation of 
modesty has been so confused that its noble name is given a state of blameworthy weakness.
•	Diagnosis of the pest:  This scourge consists in refraining from doing an obligation or telling 
the truth, such as enjoining good or seeking knowledge, under the pretext of "modesty". The 
scholars of the Ummah have settled this issue, as Imam al-Nawawi and others have pointed 
out, that this impediment "is not true modesty, but rather it is a disability, shame and 
humiliation, but rather calling it modesty from the release of some people of custom, who 
launched it metaphorically for resembling modesty."
•	Analysis of causes: This confusion is due to a misconception of the source of modesty. True 
modesty, as we have established, stems from the "life and strength of the heart", and it is 
this living heart that "avoids the ugly and prevents negligence in the right of the righteous." 
As for this inhibitory feeling, it stems from the weakness and humiliation of the soul, which 
makes its owner fall short in the performance of rights for fear of people's gaze or 
confrontation. The first stems from the glorification of God, and the second from the 
glorification of creation at the expense of truth.
2. Misplaced modesty: a fence in enemy territory
Modesty is a beautiful fence, but putting the fence in the wrong place turns it into an obstacle and a 
prison. Modesty is completely misplaced; a misplaced virtue that produces a negative effect.
•	In the field of science: the  most prominent example is modesty, which prevents questioning 
and understanding in religion. Imam Mujahid al-Khalid's saying, "Knowledge is neither 
learned nor arrogant" places this kind of modesty in the rank of arrogance, as both prevent 
them from reaching the light. On the other hand, the practical example comes in Mrs. Aisha's 
praise of the women of the Ansar: "Yes, the women are the women of the Ansar, modesty 
did not prevent them from agreeing with them in religion." They possessed a commendable 
modesty that prevented them from delving into falsehood, and they did not possess a 
reprehensible modesty that prevented them from engaging in falsehood. of asking for the 
truth.
•	In the field of rights and duties: This is manifested in many practical forms, such as silence 
about evil in the work environment "modesty" from the manager, or not claiming a clear 
financial right "modesty" from the creditor. This kind of modesty opens the door to evil wide, 
because it allows falsehood to expand, and rights to be lost, under the cover of virtue 
innocent of it.
3. The disease of insolence: death of the heart and the declaration of chaos
If reprehensible modesty is a distortion of virtue, then insolence is its total absence, which is not 
merely misconduct, but a symptom of a deeper disease: the death of the heart.
•	Rudeness as evidence of death: As Ibn al-Qayyim stated, "Whoever has no shame is dead in 
this world and is naughty in the hereafter." A man who is not affected by people's knowledge 
of his bad condition, nor is deterred by internal scruples about the ugly, is a man who has 
lost contact with the essence of life itself. His heart is dead, even though his body walks 
among people.
•	"If you are not ashamed, do whatever you want": this immortal prophetic hadith is the 
most eloquent description of the state of insolence. It is not permissible, but a report of a 
terrifying truth: if the last bastion of the soul, modesty, falls, all the fortresses fall, the moral 
constitution is abolished, absolute chaos reigns, and everything goes.
•	The origin of ignorance and the seed of evil: Rudeness is the practical application of Ibn 
Hibban's saying that abandoning modesty is "the root of ignorance, and sowing evil." The 
impudent is as ignorant as his Lord, ignorant of the value of himself, ignorant of the 
consequences of his actions, and every action that comes from him after the death of his 
modesty is necessarily a seed of evil that corrupts the earth.
Summary of the chapter:
The praiseworthy legal modesty is a delicate medium between two reprehensible parties: the creek of 
helplessness, which prevents the truth, and the arrogance of insolence, which attacks falsehood. It is 
a precise moral compass that knows when silence is wisdom and when it is a betrayal, when words 
are bold and when it is rude. Understanding these limits and scourges is the prerequisite for nurturing 
a truly "living" soul, a soul strong in truth, shy from falsehood.
CHAPTER FOUR: THE CHALLENGES OF MODESTY IN THE DIGITAL AGE - AN ETHICAL 
COMPASS FOR A CHANGING WORLD
Chapter Introduction:
Never in human history has the creation of modesty faced the test as it does today in the digital 
world. This virtual space, with its rapid deployment, ease of anonymity and overflow of content, has 
created new and unique challenges for the traditional value system. This chapter is not a call to reject 
this world, but rather an attempt to root the "jurisprudence of digital modesty", and apply its eternal 
principles to be a moral compass that guides the behavior of Muslims in this changing world, and 
protects them from its crashing waves.
1. Modesty of the digital senses: turning a blind eye and hearing in flood time
The first line of defense in the battle of modesty is the modesty of the senses, which today faces an 
unprecedented challenge.
•	Eye modesty in the world of images: "Turning a blind eye" is no longer limited to the street 
and the market, but has extended to include the screens in our hands. This translates 
practically to:
o	Choice decision: Train oneself to swipe and skip indecent content, rather than stare 
at it.
o	Purify follow-ups: Make a critical decision to unfollow accounts that promote 
nudity, triviality and vulgarity, as a form of migration from the digital bad 
environment.
•	Ear modesty in the world of sounds: With the proliferation of "vocal spaces" and podcasts, 
backbiting, gossip and delving into people's symptoms have become popular goods. Modesty 
here requires:
o	Withdrawal from malicious digital councils: Leaving any audio space or live 
broadcast wades into falsehood, just as we forbade sitting with those who engage in 
mockery ayatollahs.
o	Do not spread rumors: Refrain from sharing audio clips or videos that carry gossip 
or defamation, as the listener is a partner of the saying.
2. Digital tongue modesty: the dignity of the word in the face of easy ejaculation
The so-called "cyberbullying" or "hate speech" is only a recent expression of the absence of "modesty 
of the tongue" facilitated by screens.
•	Writing as a testimony: A Muslim should remember that every comment he writes and 
every post he shares is a word he will be asked about. Digital modesty requires filtering 
words before publishing them, and asking oneself: Is this word pleasing to God? Is there 
good or harm in it?
•	Warning of easy slander: The ease of making accusations and insults behind pseudonyms is 
one of the biggest traps of this era. Modesty from God prevents the believer from delving 
into symptoms or slandering inattentive immunities, knowing the magnitude of this crime 
with God.
3. Confronting the pettiness industry: immunity of modesty against algorithms
The greatest danger lies not only in individual bad content, but in the system that encourages it.
•	Understanding the enemy (algorithms): We must be aware that social media algorithms 
often reward shocking, controversial and trivial content, because it garners greater 
engagement. It is an "industry" that feeds on the demolition of modesty because rudeness 
attracts attention.
•	Modesty as immunity: In the face of this industry, modesty acts as a psychological and moral 
immune system. The living soul feels a natural aversion to trivial and vulgar content, and 
finds no pleasure in it.
•	The weapon of ignorance: The most powerful way to confront this industry is to deprive it of 
the oxygen it breathes: "attention." Not commenting, not sharing, and not watching is a 
positive attitude that contributes to stifling bad content.
4. Building a vibrant digital identity: an ambassador for your values, not a prisoner of your reality
The role of a Muslim is not limited to defense and immunization, but extends to positive construction.
•	From consumption to production: Rather than simply being a consumer of content, a 
Muslim can use these tools to spread useful knowledge, good word, and noble values, in a 
manner that combines attractiveness and reverence.
•	Authentic, not artificial: A  living digital identity does not need to lie, fabricate, or reveal 
private life details to attract followers. Its authenticity and value stem from its sincerity and 
usefulness.
•	Be an ambassador, not a prisoner: The  goal is for a Muslim to be an "ambassador" of the 
values of his religion and morals in this global space, reflecting a bright image of Islam, and 
not to be a "prisoner" of its trends and traditions, melting into its sweeping current.
Summary of the chapter:
The digital world is not pure evil, but a new testing ground for our faith and morality. The creation of 
modesty, in its deep sense as consciousness and life of the heart, is the most important compass that 
a Muslim can possess to navigate this crashing ocean safely, seize his good, avoid his evil, and leave a 
good mark on him and not on him.


BOOK CONCLUSION: TOWARDS A "HAYY" GENERATION
This book sought to present a new vision, which presents "modesty" not only as a moral end, but as a 
prerequisite and an indispensable cognitive tool for understanding the Book of God. We have 
revealed how this heartfelt creation is the compass that guides the process of reflection, and how it is 
the antidote that heals superficial understanding, and it is the key that opens the doors of wisdom in 
the words of God, all through the lens of the "Qur'anic jurisprudence" method, which we hope will be 
the gateway to new reflection and renewed understanding.
Our intellectual and spiritual journey has gone from the shore of meaning, navigating deep into the 
word "modesty", from deciphering the linguistic root code, through its manifestations in timeless 
Qur'anic scenes, to discovering it as a key to knowledge. Now, as we gather the threads, all methods 
lead to one fact: 
Modesty is not just a creation, but an integrated way of life, an indicator of the life of the soul itself.
But knowledge alone is not enough, and the most important question remains: how do we turn these 
theoretical convictions into living reality and daily practice? How do we raise a generation that is 
"alive" and not "shy"?
The answer lies in moving from theory to practice, from understanding virtue to pursuing it. 
Therefore, we conclude this book with a practical roadmap and a proposed program that everyone 
can adopt, and every family can make a beacon.
A practical program for the development of creation: how to live with modesty?
The development of modesty, as the "energy of the living soul", requires continuous work on three 
complementary axes: the revival of the heart, the refinement of behavior, and the fortification of the 
environment.
First: Reviving the Heart (Faith Aspect)
The heart is the source of modesty, and its life is the true guarantee of the consolidation of this 
creation.
1.	Reflecting on God's Names: The most powerful thing that instills modesty in the heart is the 
knowledge of God. Set aside time daily to reflect on God's name 
"Living" and "Alastair". Consider how God, who is rich in the worlds, "is ashamed of his servant if he 
raises his hands to him, to return them zero" to the modesty of generosity and generosity. He sensed 
how he was "Steer" who loves to cover up, and is ashamed of the assault of his disobedient servant. 
This reflection inherits in the heart a modesty from God that prevents him from professing guilt, and a 
love for the quality of concealment in the soul and creation.
2.	Monitoring and Accountability: Train yourself to evoke God's gaze on you in your retreats 
before your retreats. Remember that the modesty of Joseph (peace be upon him) was 
manifested at its peak when all eyes were absent except the eye of God, so his impregnable 
fence was "God forbid". Before bed, hold yourself accountable: how many times have you 
scratched the modesty of the eye by looking at what is not resolved? And how many times 
have you scratched the modesty of the ear by hearing moonshine or absence? And how 
many times have you scratched the modesty of the tongue with an obscene or harmful 
word? It is this accountability that makes the heart alert Greeting.
Second: Refinement of behavior (practical aspect)
Modesty translates into specific actions and behaviors, and it is an integrated system for all limbs.
1.	Modesty of prey: Modesty is not limited to the face that blushes, but it is an approach that 
includes:
o	Shyness of sight: turning a blind eye to the awrahs in reality and in the digital world.
o	Modesty of hearing: Protecting it from the councils of backbiting, gossip and 
falsehood.
o	Modesty of the tongue: Stop obscenity, obscenity, slander and bullying.
o	The modesty of a woman in her gait: as manifested in the example of Shoaib's 
daughter who "walks timidly".
2.	Behavioral exercises: virtues such as muscles, strengthened by exercise. Try these practical 
exercises:
o	"Practice the command of virtue politely": If you see a denier, instead of silence 
which is "helplessness and creekness", or denial rudely, challenge yourself to choose 
the gentlest and wisest phrases, to combine the power of truth with the beauty of 
modesty.
o	"Day without curiosity": Train yourself for a whole day not to interfere with what 
does not concern you, not to ask about people's privacy, and not to follow trivial 
news. This breeds in the soul the contraction of the ugly.
Third: Immunization of the environment (social aspect)
Modesty is a contagious creation, influenced by and influenced by the surrounding environment.
1.	Good companionship: One is on the religion of his friend, and sitting with the people of 
modesty inherits modesty, and sitting with the people of insolence kills modesty. Choose for 
your children and you have a company that helps for good, and you are ashamed of doing 
evil.
2.	The role of the hippocampus family: The family is the first incubator of modesty. Parents 
should:
o	Practical example: To be the first model of modesty in words, deeds and dress. The 
child learns with his own eyes what he does not learn with his ear.
o	Creating a living environment: The family should raise the value of modesty, and 
denounce rudeness and vulgarity in audio-visual content.
o	Conscious differentiation: teaching children the decisive difference between 
modesty, which is strength and goodness, and shyness, which is a deficit and 
weakness that prevents one from seeking knowledge or telling the truth.
Building a "alive" generation — in all the meanings of the word — is the project of the entire nation 
and the real gateway to the resumption of its civilized role. A society in which modesty dies is a 
society that has lost its last moral fortress and has become easy prey for its enemies.
We ask God to bless us with modesty from Him, modesty from His creation, and modesty from 
ourselves, and to make us among those who listen to the words and follow the best of them.
[P. 29] [P. 29] 

 
SOURCES AND REFERENCES
First: The primary source
1.	The Noble Qur'an in the Ottoman drawing, with the use of ancient Qur'anic manuscripts 
when needed - to achieve the hypotheses of the "jurisprudence of the tongue" method.
2.	The Indexed Dictionary of the Words of the Noble Qur'an - Muhammad Fouad Abdel-Baqi.
Second: Tafsir books - with a focus on methodological diversity -
•	Archaeological interpretations -to understand the meaning of the predecessor-:3. Jami' al-
Bayan fi Ta'wil al-Qur'an -Tafsir al-Tabari-, Muhammad bin Jarir al-Tabari. -The basis of 
interpretation of the proverb and language-.4. Interpretation of the Great Qur'an -Tafsir Ibn 
Kathir-, Ismail bin Omar bin Kathir. -It is characterized by taking care of hadith and linking 
verses-.5. The enlightenment of the Muqabas from the interpretation of Ibn Abbas, 
attributed to Ibn Abbas-. - is important to know the interpretations attributed to the 
Companions.
•	Linguistic and rhetorical interpretations of structural reflection: 6. The Scout for the Facts of 
the Mysteries of the Revelation - Abu al-Qasim Mahmoud bin Amr bin Ahmed - al-
Zamakhshari. -Despite his retirement orientation, it is a treasure in rhetoric and language.7. 
Liberation and Enlightenment, Muhammad Al-Taher bin Ashour. -A pioneering innovative 
approach to intentional and rhetorical interpretation. 8. Guiding a sound mind to the 
advantages of the Noble Book - Tafsir Abi Al-Saud -, Abu Al-Saud Al-Emadi. - It is 
characterized by its accuracy in explaining the faces of rhetorical miracles-.
•	Comprehensive and objective interpretations:9. Facilitating Al-Karim Al-Rahman in the 
interpretation of the words of Al-Mannan - Tafsir Al-Saadi -, Abdul Rahman bin Nasser Al-
Saadi. - An easy and clear interpretation that focuses on faith and educational meanings-.10. 
In the shadows of the Qur'an, Sayyid Qutb. -It is characterized by a high literary spirit and 
kinetic view of the Qur'an-.11. The basis of interpretation, Saeed Hawwa. -Combines 
analytical, objective and educational interpretation.
Third: Books and explanations of the Sunnah - to understand modesty in the guidance of the Prophet 
- may God's prayers and peace be upon him -
1.	Sahih al-Bukhari - Muhammad bin Ismail al-Bukhari - with his explanation of Fath al-Bari - by 
Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani.
2.	Sahih Muslim, Muslim bin Al-Hajjaj Al-Qushayri, with his explanation of the curriculum - 
Sharh Sahih Muslim bin Al-Hajjaj - by Yahya bin Sharaf Al-Nawawi.
3.	Al-Tirmidhi Mosque - Sunan Al-Tirmidhi -, Muhammad bin Issa Al-Tirmidhi, with his 
explanation of Tuhfat Al-Ahwadhi, by Al-Mubarakfuri.
4.	Sunan Abi Dawood, Suleiman bin Al-Ash'ath Al-Sijistani.
5.	Musnad of Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal, Ahmed bin Hanbal Al-Shaibani.
6.	Riyad Al-Salihin, Yahya bin Sharaf Al-Nawawi. -To collect hadiths related to ethics-.
Fourth: Dictionaries and language books - to delve into the linguistic root -
1.	Lisan al-Arab, Ibn Manzur.
2.	Language Standards - Ahmed bin Faris bin Zakaria Al-Qazwini Al-Razi.
3.	Al-Sahih is the crown of language and the Arabic Sahih, Ismail bin Hammad Al-Gohari.
4.	Refinement of the language, Azhari.
5.	Vocabulary of the words of the Qur'an - Ragheb Isfahani. - An indispensable book to 
understand the meanings of Quranic vocabulary.
Fifth: Books on ethics - behavior and chips - to understand modesty in the value system -
1.	The Revival of Religious Sciences, Abu Hamid Al-Ghazali. -Especially "Quarter of Deaths" and 
"Quarter of Salvations"-.
2.	The runways of the walkers between the houses of you we worship and you do not seek 
help, Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyyah. -A profound book on spiritual education and the homes of 
walking to God.
3.	The adequate answer is for those who asked about the panacea - the disease and the 
medicine -, Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyya.
4.	Rawdat al-Aqla and Nuzhat al-Fadla', Muhammad ibn Hibban al-Busti.
5.	The literature of the world and religion - Abu al-Hasan al-Mawardi.
Sixth: Contemporary and systematic studies - for regenerative rooting -
1.	Modesty in the Noble Qur'an: An Objective Analytical Study, d. Hessa bint Hamad Al-Hawas. -
As cited in our dialogue-.
2.	Books and articles on the "Qur'anic Jurisprudence of the Tongue" or "Structural 
Interpretation of Letters", - mention here the names of the authors who adopt this 
methodology such as Benouda Abdelghani and others you have seen to establish your 
method.
3.	The phenomenon of synonymy in the Noble Qur'an, Muhammad Nur al-Din al-Munajjid. -
Important to support the idea of negation of synonymy on which the curriculum is based-.
4.	The best rules in the attributes of God and His Most Beautiful Names - Muhammad bin Saleh 
Al-Uthaymeen. - An important reference in understanding the names and attributes of God 
according to the approach of Ahl al-Sunnah.



1

